README.md, before:

# Romanian Public Compensation Data (ETL Pipeline)

This project demonstrates an **end-to-end ETL (Extract, Transform, Load)** workflow using **Python (pandas)** and **PostgreSQL**.

The dataset represents nominal compensation payments for Romanian public institutions, extracted from an official PDF source and transformed for structured storage and analysis.

---

## Project Structure

```
data/
│   indemnizatii.csv                   # Raw input data from PDF export
│   indemnizatii_clean.csv             # Cleaned output generated from ETL

scripts/
└── clean/
    data_clean.py                      # Core cleaning and normalization logic
    validate_and_export.py             # Structural validation of raw CSV
    reload_indemnizatii_clean.py       # Bulk load into PostgreSQL
    run_pipeline_clean.py              # Orchestrates cleaning + loading process

tools/
    debug_nrcrt_inference.py           # NR_CRT inference utility
    find_missing_fields.py             # Identifies undocumented column gaps
    find_null_rows.py                  # Surface unexpected null patterns

sql/
├── schema/
│     create_table_indemnizatii_clean.sql   # DDL for PostgreSQL loading table
│
└── queries/
      clean/
        avg_compensation_by_role.sql
        personnel_total_comp.sql
        top_10_directors_by_total_compensation.sql
        top_companies_by_total_compensation.sql

dbt_project/
└── models/
    staging/
      stg_indemnizatii_clean.sql              # Source standardization model
      stg_indemnizatii_clean.yml              # Source-level tests

    intermediate/
      int_indemnizatii_base.sql               # Normalized salary data
      int_persoane_clean.sql                  # Deduplicated identities
      int_companii_clean.sql                  # Company mapping layer
      schema.yml                              # Tests for base/intermediate layer

    marts/
      fact_indemnizatii.sql                   # Annual compensation fact table
      dim_persoane.sql                        # Person dimension
      dim_companii.sql                        # Company dimension
      schema.yml                              
      analytics/
        distribution_companii.sql
        organization_pay_spread.sql
        top_companii_by_spend.sql
        top_earners.sql
        yearly_salary_evolution.sql
      quality/
        duplicate_person_contracts.sql

README.md
.gitignore
```

## Pipeline Overview

### 1. Extract
Data is exported manually from the official AMEPIP PDF into indemnizatii.csv.

### 2. Transform (Python)
The cleaning pipeline performs:

Column normalization
- remove diacritics
- lowercases
- replaces spaces with underscores
- collapses repeated underscores

Text cleanup
- remove PDF-artifact line breaks
- strips whitespace
- replaces placeholders (-, null, N/A) with empty string

Salary normalization
    Handles all irregular compensation formats:
    - 31 530 -> 31530
    - 23316/46632 -> 46632 (take max)
    - 71000+71000 -> 142000 (sum)
    - 5000 - 2000 -> splits into base + variable
    - preserves readable text fields (suma, indemnizatie_variabila)
    - generates safe integer columns:
        - suma_num
        - indemnizatie_variabila_num

Missing nr_crt auto-inferrence
    If a row lacks nr_crt, the pipeline fills it using satble cui -> nr_crt mapping.

### 3. Load (PostgreSQL)
Schema:
    sql/schema/create_table_indemnizatii_clean.sql

Load cleaned data:
    python scripts/clean/reload_indemnizatii_clean.py

    Performs:
        - TRUNCATE TABLE ... RESTART IDENTITY to reset primary key
        - fast COPY import
        - safe connection handling

How to Run:
```
python scripts/clean/run_pipeline_clean.py
python scripts/clean/reload_indemnizatii_clean.py
```

### 4. SQL Queries Included

Inside sql/queries/clean/ you will find useful analytical test queries, such as:
    - average compensation by role
    - personnel total compensation
    - top directors by total compensation
    - top companies ranked by aggregate compensation

These scripts are intentionally kept simple and are useful for validating the cleaned dataset before moving transformations into dbt.

### 5. DBT Integration

This project now includes a dedicated dbt transformation layer located in the dbt_project/ directory.

## DBT Transformation Layer

The `/dbt_project` directory contains the transformation logic that converts raw loaded data into an analytics-ready format.

The dbt layer produces:
- fact_indemnizatii: annual compensation dataset
- dim_persoane: normalized people dimension
- dim_companii: normalized company dimension

Execution steps:
```
cd dbt_project
dbt build
```

To generate documentation and lineage view:
```
dbt docs generate
dbt docs serve
```

The transformation is parameterized using an annual reporting variable:
```
vars:
  indemnizatii_year: 2025
```

### Analytics Models

The dbt analytics layer now includes derived models designed for reporting, ranking, and quality validation:

- distribution_companii  
  Salary distribution per institution: min, median, max, and spending totals.

- top_companii_by_spend  
  Ranks institutions by total remuneration expenditure.

- top_earners  
  Top earning individuals, based on aggregated annual compensation.

- yearly_salary_evolution  
  Year-level financial summary to support multiple-year comparisons.

- duplicate_person_contracts  
  Highlights data inconsistencies where repeated records exist for the same individual within an institution.

- organization_pay_spread  
  Computes compensation spread per organization, useful for inequality analysis.

## Pipeline Architecture
Raw CSV → Python ETL → Postgres (indemnizatii_clean) → DBT staging → Analytics layer

## Cloud Infrastructure (Terraform)

This project includes a complete AWS deployment of the ETL pipeline using Terraform.
The infrastructure layer provides:

### S3 Storage
- `artifacts` bucket for ETL packages, metadata, and intermediate assets  
- `logs` bucket for centralized access logging  
- Versioning, encryption, and lifecycle policies

### Lambda Execution Scaffold
A deployable ETL entrypoint for future automation (e.g., EventBridge scheduled runs).

### PostgreSQL (Amazon RDS)
A managed Postgres instance used as the target for the cleaned ETL data.
Terraform provisions:
- DB subnet group
- Security group with IP-restricted inbound rules  
- Parameterized DB name, username, password  
- Outputs exposing the connection endpoint

Connect using:
```
psql -h <rds_endpoint> -U <username> -d romanian_comp
```

### IAM Roles
Least-privilege role + inline policy for Lambda to interact with S3.

### Deployment Commands
```
cd infra/terraform
terraform init
terraform apply -var-file="dev.auto.tfvars"
```

This infrastructure is intentionally minimal, focusing on:
- platform readiness  
- reproducibility  
- clean separation between compute, storage, and orchestration  

### Data Source and Use Disclaimer

This project uses publicly available data published by the Autoritatea pentru Monitorizarea și Evaluarea Performanțelor Întreprinderilor Publice (AMEPIP), Romania.

Original dataset:
https://amepip.gov.ro/wp-content/uploads/2025/08/Situatia-indemnizatiilor-nominale-IP-centrale-august-2025.pdf

The data is used strictly for educational and non-commercial purposes as part of a personal data engineering portfolio.
All personal information appearing in the dataset originates from official public disclosures made in accordance with Romanian transparency laws (Law no. 544/2001).

No attempt is made to alter, interpret, or republish personal data beyond its original context.

Commit message:

Add S3 upload step for cleaned indemnizatii dataset

README.md, after:

# Romanian Public Compensation Data (ETL Pipeline)

This project demonstrates an **end-to-end ETL (Extract, Transform, Load)** workflow using **Python (pandas)** and **PostgreSQL**.

The dataset represents nominal compensation payments for Romanian public institutions, extracted from an official PDF source and transformed for structured storage and analysis.

---

## Project Structure

```
data/
│   indemnizatii.csv                   # Raw input data from PDF export
│   indemnizatii_clean.csv             # Cleaned output generated from ETL

scripts/
└── clean/
    data_clean.py                      # Core cleaning and normalization logic
    validate_and_export.py             # Structural validation of raw CSV
    reload_indemnizatii_clean.py       # Bulk load into PostgreSQL
    upload_to_s3.py                    # Upload cleaned dataset to S3 (ingestion boundary)
    run_pipeline_clean.py              # Orchestrates cleaning + loading process

tools/
    debug_nrcrt_inference.py           # NR_CRT inference utility
    find_missing_fields.py             # Identifies undocumented column gaps
    find_null_rows.py                  # Surface unexpected null patterns

sql/
├── schema/
│     create_table_indemnizatii_clean.sql   # DDL for PostgreSQL loading table
└── queries/
      clean/
        avg_compensation_by_role.sql
        personnel_total_comp.sql
        top_10_directors_by_total_compensation.sql
        top_companies_by_total_compensation.sql

dbt_project/
└── models/
    staging/
      stg_indemnizatii_clean.sql              # Source standardization model
      stg_indemnizatii_clean.yml              # Source-level tests

    intermediate/
      int_indemnizatii_base.sql               # Normalized salary data
      int_persoane_clean.sql                  # Deduplicated identities
      int_companii_clean.sql                  # Company mapping layer
      schema.yml                              # Tests for base/intermediate layer

    marts/
      fact_indemnizatii.sql                   # Annual compensation fact table
      dim_persoane.sql                        # Person dimension
      dim_companii.sql                        # Company dimension
      schema.yml                              
      analytics/
        distribution_companii.sql
        organization_pay_spread.sql
        top_companii_by_spend.sql
        top_earners.sql
        yearly_salary_evolution.sql
      quality/
        duplicate_person_contracts.sql

README.md
.gitignore
```

## Pipeline Overview

### 1. Extract
Data is exported manually from the official AMEPIP PDF into indemnizatii.csv.

### 2. Transform (Python)
The cleaning pipeline performs:

Column normalization
- remove diacritics
- lowercases
- replaces spaces with underscores
- collapses repeated underscores

Text cleanup
- remove PDF-artifact line breaks
- strips whitespace
- replaces placeholders (-, null, N/A) with empty string

Salary normalization
    Handles all irregular compensation formats:
    - 31 530 -> 31530
    - 23316/46632 -> 46632 (take max)
    - 71000+71000 -> 142000 (sum)
    - 5000 - 2000 -> splits into base + variable
    - preserves readable text fields (suma, indemnizatie_variabila)
    - generates safe integer columns:
        - suma_num
        - indemnizatie_variabila_num

Missing nr_crt auto-inferrence
    If a row lacks nr_crt, the pipeline fills it using satble cui -> nr_crt mapping.

### 3. Load (PostgreSQL)
Schema:
    sql/schema/create_table_indemnizatii_clean.sql

Load cleaned data:
    python scripts/clean/reload_indemnizatii_clean.py

    Performs:
        - TRUNCATE TABLE ... RESTART IDENTITY to reset primary key
        - fast COPY import
        - safe connection handling

How to Run:
```
python scripts/clean/run_pipeline_clean.py
python scripts/clean/reload_indemnizatii_clean.py
```

### 3.1 Upload (S3 – Ingestion Boundary)

After local cleaning and validation, the finalized dataset
(`indemnizatii_clean.csv`) is uploaded to Amazon S3.

This establishes S3 as a clear ingestion boundary between data preparation and downstream consumers.

Script:
```
python scripts/clean/upload_to_s3.py
```

The upload step:
- persists a versioned artifact of the cleaned dataset
- decouples Python ETL from database loading
- enables future orchestration via Lambda or scheduled jobs
- aligns with cloud-native ingestion patterns

The S3 object path follows a stable convention:
s3://<artifacts-bucket>/indemnizatii/indemnizatii_clean.csv

### 4. SQL Queries Included

Inside sql/queries/clean/ you will find useful analytical test queries, such as:
    - average compensation by role
    - personnel total compensation
    - top directors by total compensation
    - top companies ranked by aggregate compensation

These scripts are intentionally kept simple and are useful for validating the cleaned dataset before moving transformations into dbt.

### 5. DBT Integration

This project now includes a dedicated dbt transformation layer located in the dbt_project/ directory.

## DBT Transformation Layer

The `/dbt_project` directory contains the transformation logic that converts raw loaded data into an analytics-ready format.

The dbt layer produces:
- fact_indemnizatii: annual compensation dataset
- dim_persoane: normalized people dimension
- dim_companii: normalized company dimension

Execution steps:
```
cd dbt_project
dbt build
```

To generate documentation and lineage view:
```
dbt docs generate
dbt docs serve
```

The transformation is parameterized using an annual reporting variable:
```
vars:
  indemnizatii_year: 2025
```

### Analytics Models

The dbt analytics layer now includes derived models designed for reporting, ranking, and quality validation:

- distribution_companii  
  Salary distribution per institution: min, median, max, and spending totals.

- top_companii_by_spend  
  Ranks institutions by total remuneration expenditure.

- top_earners  
  Top earning individuals, based on aggregated annual compensation.

- yearly_salary_evolution  
  Year-level financial summary to support multiple-year comparisons.

- duplicate_person_contracts  
  Highlights data inconsistencies where repeated records exist for the same individual within an institution.

- organization_pay_spread  
  Computes compensation spread per organization, useful for inequality analysis.

## Pipeline Architecture
Raw CSV → Python ETL → S3 (artifacts) → PostgreSQL (RDS) → dbt → Analytics layer

## Cloud Infrastructure (Terraform)

This project includes a complete AWS deployment of the ETL pipeline using Terraform.
The infrastructure layer provides:

### S3 Storage
- `artifacts` bucket for ETL packages, metadata, and intermediate assets  
- `logs` bucket for centralized access logging  
- Versioning, encryption, and lifecycle policies

### Lambda Execution Scaffold
A deployable ETL entrypoint for future automation (e.g., EventBridge scheduled runs).

### PostgreSQL (Amazon RDS)
A managed Postgres instance used as the target for the cleaned ETL data.
Terraform provisions:
- DB subnet group
- Security group with IP-restricted inbound rules  
- Parameterized DB name, username, password  
- Outputs exposing the connection endpoint

Connect using:
```
psql -h <rds_endpoint> -U <username> -d romanian_comp
```

### IAM Roles
Least-privilege role + inline policy for Lambda to interact with S3.

### Deployment Commands
```
cd infra/terraform
terraform init
terraform apply -var-file="dev.auto.tfvars"
```

This infrastructure is intentionally minimal, focusing on:
- platform readiness  
- reproducibility  
- clean separation between compute, storage, and orchestration  

### Data Source and Use Disclaimer

This project uses publicly available data published by the Autoritatea pentru Monitorizarea și Evaluarea Performanțelor Întreprinderilor Publice (AMEPIP), Romania.

Original dataset:
https://amepip.gov.ro/wp-content/uploads/2025/08/Situatia-indemnizatiilor-nominale-IP-centrale-august-2025.pdf

The data is used strictly for educational and non-commercial purposes as part of a personal data engineering portfolio.
All personal information appearing in the dataset originates from official public disclosures made in accordance with Romanian transparency laws (Law no. 544/2001).

No attempt is made to alter, interpret, or republish personal data beyond its original context.
